---
created: 2021-12-25T17:20:11-05:00
modified: 2021-12-25T17:20:23-05:00
---

# Interviewing as a skill

For both new and experienced engineers in the industry, getting a job is annoying. So many resources focus on bullshit topics like solving code problems or other details favoring the companies. It's just accepted that there is never any mention of any industry wide standard to even standardize the hiring process. It's a sad trend that the system is built to make us believe the company is more valuable than the engineer need to build the company.

There is not even any prep when students graduate and are entering the industry. All the focus leans into a piece of paper that is implied to grant access to a job offer. The reality is that resume, no matter how pretty or full of experience, is only important if you are prepared for the interaction that follows.

That interaction is critical! Do you know why? What about if you have already worked a job or two? I don't believe many of the engineers working now would know how to leave their job and interview with confidence. There are many factors in landing a job, some based on luck, or traits the individual is oblivious to because companies aren't sending feedback detailing why an offer was extended. 

If you are still here, are you trying to guess? You think it's personality? What about references? Maybe knowing someone at the company? 

Of course it can be all that. But what about that piece of paper? You think a resume is the only tool to get someone to call? What if you prepped for a coding challenge, but instead it's five engineers conducting a tech-panel? 

Did you know you can decide some parts of an interview process? Read that line again. If you didn't know that until now, then you need to treat the process like a skill. 

Leave a comment or like if you are interested in learning more....
